docs/en/modules/ROOT/pages/database-connection.adoc, before:

= Supported Databases

This section provides information about the source database types supported by the IPT

== Supported default databases

The IPT can use database connections to import data from tables or views. Currently the following databases are supported out of the box:

* Microsoft SQL Server
* MySQL
* Oracle
* PostgreSQL
* Sybase databases

== Adding new JDBC drivers

You can add your own JDBC drivers to the IPT if needed. For example if you prefer to use the Microsoft JDBC driver for SQL Server or want to add one for SQLite. The following steps assume you have a working IPT installed with an "exploded" WAR, i.e. you have a folder `ipt` (or however you named your instance) in your application server's webapps folder. The IPT needs to be stopped before you start adding a driver:

=== Add JDBC driver JAR to classpath

First get hold of the JAR file of the driver you want to add, for example download the SQLite jar here: https://bitbucket.org/xerial/sqlite-jdbc/downloads

You need to copy this jar into the classpath of your webapp. The simplest is to copy it to the `ipt/WEB-INF/lib` directory.

=== Modify jdbc.properties

In order for the IPT to understand which drivers are available and how to construct the JDBC URL for it, we maintain a simple properties file with all the information. Open `ipt/WEB-INF/classes/jdbc.properties` and inspect the existing entries, for example for PostgreSQL:

----
# PostgreSQL driver
pgsql.title=PostgreSQL
pgsql.driver=org.postgresql.Driver
pgsql.url=jdbc:postgresql://{host}/{database}
pgsql.limitType=LIMIT
----

There are 4 properties that you need to add for each driver. All 4 have to start with the same prefix that you can freely choose without any further meaning:

* `title`: The title to be displayed in the IPT for this driver
* `driver`: The driver java class to be used when connecting
* `url`: A template to build the url for connecting. There are 2 variables that can be used in the url string which will be replaced by the actual settings configured: `\{host}` and `\{database}`
* `limitType`: How to limit the amount of data returned. Possible values are `LIMIT`, `TOP`, `ROWNUM`. This is driver specific.

In the SQLite example above the driver connects to a file, so no `\{host}` is used in the url template. Please add the following to the jdbc.properties to add the SQLite driver:

----
# SQLite driver
# uses files only, so {host} is ignored
# database example on Windows: C:/work/mydatabase.db
# database example on Linux: /home/leo/work/mydatabase.db
sqlite.title=SQLite
sqlite.driver=org.sqlite.JDBC
sqlite.url=jdbc:sqlite:{database}
sqlite.limitType=LIMIT
----

Now you can restart the IPT and use the new driver for mapping SQLite data sources.

Commit message:

Add discussion of postgres jdbc arguments

docs/en/modules/ROOT/pages/database-connection.adoc, after:

= Supported Databases

This section provides information about the source database types supported by the IPT

== Supported default databases

The IPT can use database connections to import data from tables or views. Currently the following databases are supported out of the box:

* Microsoft SQL Server
* MySQL
* Oracle
* PostgreSQL
* Sybase databases

== Adding new JDBC drivers

You can add your own JDBC drivers to the IPT if needed. For example if you prefer to use the Microsoft JDBC driver for SQL Server or want to add one for SQLite. The following steps assume you have a working IPT installed with an "exploded" WAR, i.e. you have a folder `ipt` (or however you named your instance) in your application server's webapps folder. The IPT needs to be stopped before you start adding a driver:

=== Add JDBC driver JAR to classpath

First get hold of the JAR file of the driver you want to add, for example download the SQLite jar here: https://bitbucket.org/xerial/sqlite-jdbc/downloads

You need to copy this jar into the classpath of your webapp. The simplest is to copy it to the `ipt/WEB-INF/lib` directory.

=== Modify jdbc.properties

In order for the IPT to understand which drivers are available and how to construct the JDBC URL for it, we maintain a simple properties file with all the information. Open `ipt/WEB-INF/classes/jdbc.properties` and inspect the existing entries, for example for PostgreSQL:

----
# PostgreSQL driver
pgsql.title=PostgreSQL
pgsql.driver=org.postgresql.Driver
pgsql.url=jdbc:postgresql://{host}/{database}
pgsql.limitType=LIMIT
----

There are 4 properties that you need to add for each driver. All 4 have to start with the same prefix that you can freely choose without any further meaning:

* `title`: The title to be displayed in the IPT for this driver
* `driver`: The driver java class to be used when connecting
* `url`: A template to build the url for connecting. There are 2 variables that can be used in the url string which will be replaced by the actual settings configured: `\{host}` and `\{database}`
* `limitType`: How to limit the amount of data returned. Possible values are `LIMIT`, `TOP`, `ROWNUM`. This is driver specific.

In the PostgreSQL example above you can modify url arguments found here: https://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/connect.html to enable for example SSL and version compatibility like the following:

----
pgsql.url=jdbc:postgresql://{host}/{database}?sslmode=require
----

In the SQLite example above the driver connects to a file, so no `\{host}` is used in the url template. Please add the following to the jdbc.properties to add the SQLite driver:

----
# SQLite driver
# uses files only, so {host} is ignored
# database example on Windows: C:/work/mydatabase.db
# database example on Linux: /home/leo/work/mydatabase.db
sqlite.title=SQLite
sqlite.driver=org.sqlite.JDBC
sqlite.url=jdbc:sqlite:{database}
sqlite.limitType=LIMIT
----

Now you can restart the IPT and use the new driver for mapping SQLite data sources.
