#summary How to contribute
#sidebar TableOfContents

= Introduction =
The core development of the IPT is directed by GBIF, but the coding, the documentation and internationalisation is a community effort and everyone is welcome to join the project. *Please use the [http://lists.gbif.org/mailman/listinfo/ipt mailing list] to get in touch with the developers and project leaders*.

= How To Contribute =
== Documentation ==
We are always keen on getting a better documentation. The easiest and quickest way to help us improving the user manual is to [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/entry?template=Documentation%20issue submit documentation issues] into our issue tracker and mark them with "Documentation". This will be picked up by our technical writer and finally end up in the user manual which is [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/source/browse/trunk/gbif-ipt-docs/IPT_documentation.txt hosted in the code repository].

If you feel there is a lot to modify, please get in touch with us to get write access to subversion.

== Translations ==
The IPT and the documentation both need internationalisation. In the case of the IPT all text is kept in so called property files, one for each language. The [http://gbif-providertoolkit.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/gbif-providertool/src/main/resources/ApplicationResources.properties original] is in english and if you are able and willing to translate it into another language, please get in touch with us!

== Source Code ==
Java or html/jquery developers are very welcome to contribute. See [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/wiki/Features#Key_Technologies key technologies] for the most important frameworks we use.