#summary Installation and build instructions based on IPT version 1.0beta

The IPT consists of 2 webapplications that run separately in a Java 1.5 container.
The default installation of the IPT is using the compiled ipt.war and a geoserver.zip archive available in the download section (we are still waiting for Google to allow us to host larger files. So for now GBIF hosts the [http://kiwaia.gbif.org/ipt/IPT-1.0beta_geoserver.zip geoserver archive]). Alternatively you can build the IPT from source which is described at the bottom of this page (only recommended for Java developers).

 * [#Application_Server Install Application Server]
 * [#IPT Install IPT]
 * [#Geoserver Install Geoserver]


-----
= Application Server =
The IPT should run in any compliant java  application server using Java 1.5. We have tested it with Jetty and Tomcat, which we recommend for the installation. The IPT requires quite some memory, as it also runs a full database. So make sure your application server has enough memory available and potentially increase the memory to 1 gig or more (Tomcat on [http://explanatorygap.net/2005/03/06/configuring-tomcat-under-os-x-server-for-more-memory/ OSX], [http://wiki.apache.org/tomcat/FAQ/Memory general]). 

-----
= IPT =
In most application servers like Tomcat it is enough to simply drop the war into the webapp directory.
You might need to restart the server. Consult your application server manual how to deploy war archives.
In case you dont have any application server you can download Tomcat from here:
http://www.apache.org/tomcat

In the rest of this document we are going to refer to the IPT directory inside Tomcats webapps folder simply as {{{%IPT}}}


=== IPT settings ===
Nearly all configuration is done through the admin webinterface and stored in IPTs cache database. There is one exception to this and that is where the IPT database is actually located!

The default data directory of the IPT is inside the applications webapp and comes with 2 sample resources preconfigured. If you want to keep your data somewhere different (for easier backup for example), you can change one line in {{{%IPT/WEB-INF/classes/ipt.properties}}}:
{{{
dataDir=/wherever/you/want/data
}}}

This change requires a restart of the IPT of course (restarting or reloading tomcat)
You should now be able to see the IPT in your browser. For a default tomcat installation this would be:

{{{http://localhost:8080/ipt-1.0beta/}}}

=== Web-based configuration ===
As you might have noticed a lot of images are broken. To fix this, you need to configure some basic settings in the web admin interface, especially the base URL of your server. Go to:

{{{http://localhost:8080/ipt-1.0beta/admin/settings.html}}}

Login as the admin (default is user=admin, password=admin) and update all settings you can find on this page, described in detail at [UserManual#Settings]


-----

= Geoserver =
To run IPT' geoservices we have developed a small plugin for [http://geoserver.org Geoserver] that allows it to access the IPT cache. We provide a [http://kiwaia.gbif.org/ipt/IPT-1.0beta_geoserver.zip geoserver archive] that comes bundled with the plugin, but you shuld also be able to install the pluging in your own geoserver installation. It was build for [http://geoserver.org/display/GEOS/GeoServer+1.7.0 geoserver 1.7.0] but should also work with higher versions. The source code is hosted in the [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/source/browse/#svn/trunk/GT2-gbif-providertool SVN] and the plugin is available as a jar in the downloads.

== Install plugin in existing geoserver ==
This step can be skipped if you use the geoserver WAR that we provide for the IPT. In case you wanna use your own,
add the following 2 jars into your geoserver lib directory which is at {{{geoserver/WEB-INF/lib}}}:
 * h2-1.1.104.jar [http://code.google.com/p/h2database/downloads/detail?name=h2-2008-11-28.zip&can=2 download]
 * gt2-ipt-1.4.jar [http://gbif-providertoolkit.googlecode.com/files/gt2-ipt-1.4.jar download]

== Configure Geoserver ==
You need to let geoserver know where your IPT data directory is, that's all you need to do. By default it assumes it lives within the IPT webapp next to geoservers, but you should make sure that this is correct.

Go to the {{{Feature Data Set Configuration}}} (Menu: Config/Data/Datastores), select IPT and edit the {{{datadir}}} so it points to your data directory. Then save and apply the configuration (upper corner left).



-----

= Building IPT from source =
The build process is using Maven and by default the IPT should run with a single command after you have checked out the sourcecode.
Most parameters are kept as variable definitions at the bottom of the Maven pom.xml file which can be found in the root folder of the project.


=== Developer details ===
Values are propagated like this

pom.xml 
 -->
application.properties
ipt.properties
+ WebCtxPropertyResolver for ${dataDir}+${webappDir}
 --> 
ApplicationContext.xml
ApplicationContext-resources.xml

The problem with this is that the WebCtxPropertyResolver needs to be created before any other bean, so you cannot inject other beans.
But to resolve the webapp dir (and in turn the default datadir) we need a servlet context. Which is fine in production, but for tests we need a mock.
Which unfortunately doesnt get created and therefore injected before this bean is created. Buh.


== Run IPT via Jetty ==
Maven can run the IPT in a local java webserver called Jetty.
This is useful for testing and getting the software to run quickly, but is not recommended for production.
To start the IPT via the jetty server simply run the following maven command from the projects root folder:
mvn -P prod

You should then be able to access the IPT at:
http://localhost:8080


== Build WAR and deploy it to Tomcat ==
The following maven command builds the war archive which then can be found in the target folder:
mvn -P prod install


=== IPT settings and H2 ===
The IPT settings are stored in the database through the class ProviderCfg which is embedded in AppConfig,
a singleton that is injected into most other spring beans.