#summary IPT 2.1 Release Notes

----
Copyright 2014 Global Biodiversity Information Facility Secretariat

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file 
except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the 
License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, 
either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions 
and limitations under the License.
----
=Release Notes=

* IPT Version: 2.1*

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

===Upgrade instructions===

A. Performing the upgrade

Warning 1: It is always a good idea to take the precaution of backing up the existing IPT 
data directory before performing an upgrade. 

Warning 2: Once an IPT has been upgraded to 2.1, it will not be possible to downgrade to an earlier version of changes to the configuration files.

An upgrade can be performed in 3 steps:

  # Replace the previous .war file with the latest edition
  # Backup the existing data directory
  # Reuse the existing data directory during setup

B. Post-upgrade instructions
 
If upgrading from 2.0.3, once the upgrade is complete, resource managers should: 
  # Reset the resource subtype (if applicable), making the selection on the basic metadata page. The reason being that this list now refers to a controlled vocabulary in all subsequent versions and previous selections will have been reset. 
  # Re-save the metadata for each resource. The reason being that additional validation has been added to the metadata pages in all subsequent versions in order to ensure better compliance with the GBIF metadata profile.

C. Other

GBIF has released a new [[IPT2Core guide] on how to add custom cores to the IPT, aimed advaned users and communities prototyping new data standards

===Dependency Notes:===

This new version has been tested and designed to work on Tomcat 6.0 or 7.0. Please note IPT 2.1 no longer supports Java 5, and is designed to run on Java 6 or later. 

===Viewing the IPT change log:===

This version addressed a total of 85 issues: 38 Defects, 11 Enhancements, 18 Won't fix, 6 Duplicates, 1 Other, and 11 that were considered as Invalid. 
These are detailed in the [https://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?can=1&q=milestone=Release2.1&sort=status&colspec=ID%20Type%20Status%20Priority%20Milestone%20Owner%20Summary issue tracking system]
  
===When all else fails:===

See the [FAQ], which continues to be updated with good questions.