#summary Roadmap for upcoming releases
#sidebar TableOfContents

Estimated release dates can vary considerably and are shown mainly to indicate forthcoming functionality.

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

-----
= Release 1.0 (delivered 2010-01-31) =

== Internationalisation (done `r1646`) ==
 * Ensure application is fully internationalised
   * check all actions and templates for hard coded values
   * explore options of web app to allow collaborative translations
   * GBIF to solicit help in translations through nodes

== Delete bug (done `r1646`) ==
 * Issue155

== Darwin Core update (done `r1670`) ==
 * adapt cache data model to ratified [http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/index.htm darwin core terms]

-----
= Release 1.1 (scheduled 2010-03-31) =
[http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?can=2&q=label%3AMilestone-Release1.1&colspec=ID+Type+Status+Priority+Milestone+Owner+Summary&cells=tiles All issues]

== prepare IPT to be used as a repository in a hosting environment ==
 * Timeline: scheduled for testing 2010-03-03
 * Requirement: "Support the association of IPT resources with differing
Organisations within an IPT. Therefore the Administrator of an IPT used in a Hosting
Centre can create new User accounts, grant Managerial permissions to those User
accounts (as per 1.0RC3), and allow those Users to define the Organisation to which
the managed Resource is associated, during creation or modification of the Resource.
   * Action: Provide requirements. (Tim completed 2010-02-25)
   * Action: Release code for testing (Aaron scheduled 2010-03-03)
   * Action: Manage testing with DanBIF (Kyle)
   * References: MultipleOrganisationsInIPT.pdf. Issue252.

== Simplified & improved background publication process ==
 * Requirement: Background publishing is needed to simplify synchronization.
   * Action: Refine requirements (John first pass; discuss 2010-03-03)
   * Agreement: Once the GBIF registry is capable (>2010-03-31), organisation metadata will be managed externally only (not in the IPT admin UI). A picklist of registered organisations will be generated by accessing the registry via a REST API.
   * Agreement: A resource can have only two states: private or public. Requires resource watcher in the background.
     * Reference: Issue255
   * Agreement: Changing the base URL for the IPT updates registered services.
     * Reference: Issue159
   * Agreement: Default to dev registry and allow switching to production registry in admin config.
     * Reference: Issue207

== Enhanced resource metadata ==
 * Timeline: complete by 2010-03-15
 * Requirement: Resource metadata / EML persistence and editor must support the GBIF metadata profile.
 * Agreement: UI will be common in style to current, expanded to support new terms.  Aaron's mockups to be discarded for time being, potentially picked up in the future.
 * Action: Implement GBIF metadata model provided by Peter Were. (Aaron completed 2010-02-23)
 * Action: Review committed model by implementing Freemarker template and Unit test. (Tim scheduled 2010-03-01)
 * Action: Implement changes to UI screens to accommodate newly supported metadata. (Aaron scheduled for review/testing 2010-03-10)

== DwC-A import ==
 * Timeline: complete by 2010-03-31
 * Requirement: allow upload of entire existing dwc archives reading its metadata, individual data files and mapping information.
   * Agreement: Support import of ratified DwC and extensions.
     * Open question: What action should be taken on mal-formed archive?
   * Agreement: Report warning for any unmapped extension.
   * References: Issue186, Issue202, Issue209, Issue235, Issue271
 * Requirement: allow upload of external metadata document
   * Agreement: Support reading of any metadata standard. Non-GBIF metadata will be retained as read only, with user providing fields required by IPT operation if not found, e.g., Title). 
     * Open question: What action should be taken on mal-formed metadata?
   * Agreement: Read-only metadata can be replaced by the user and updated into IPT on demand.
     * Open question: What are the exceptions to look out for here?
     * Open question: Treat a change of metadata the same as when creating a resource?
   * References: Issue258, Issue264

== code cleanup ==
 * Timeline: complete by 2010-03-31
 * Requirement: remove appfuse framework
   * Reference: Issue253
 * Requirement: Update IPT lite to be build via war overlay based on the regular IPT.
   * Reference: Issue254

== Critical Bugs ==
 * Timeline: complete by 2010-03-31
http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?can=2&q=priority%3ACritical&colspec=ID+Type+Status+Priority+Milestone+Owner+Summary&cells=tiles

== RTF Output ==
 * Timeline: unknown
 * Requirement: Potentially Zookeys will supply Java code to insert into IPT codebase to produce RTF output from IPT EML model classes.
 * Action: none required yet
 * References: "DATA PAPER AUTHORING AND PUBLICATION TO THE ZOOKEYS JOURNAL USING THE IPT" dataPaper.doc)

-----
= Release 1.2 =
scheduled for 31-05-2010
[http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?can=2&q=label%3AMilestone-Release1.2&colspec=ID+Type+Status+Priority+Milestone+Owner+Summary&cells=tiles All issues]
== native occurrence maps without geosever ==
== optional geoserver 2.0 with configuration via REST services ==



-----
= Release 1.x =
not yet scheduled but planned for 2010
== Mapping Improvements ==
 * Intuitiveness of mapping section
   * Logged as issues tagged with "Configuration" in Issues list
   * Inline help, tooltips etc to guide users through process 

== Annotation ==
not scheduled, see [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?q=label:Annotation Annotation issues]
 * asynchronous [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-annotation-processor/wiki/AnnotationAPI annotation API] added for validation services
 * download of annotations as CSV file

== Transformations ==
 * advanced mapping/transformations

== Performance ==
see [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?q=label: Performance Performance issues]
 * separate cache database into 1 shared resource configuration db and 1 data cache db per resource: Issue157
 * provide single default root node for taxonomic and regional tree: Issue158
 * http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/issues/list?q=label:Performance
 * Remove Dependency on AppFuse (perhaps postpone to 1.2?)
   * Performance reasons primarily
   * Replace with custom user/role management (check status of gbif openid offerings?)
   * Consider simplifying main page markup and CSS (lower priority)




-----
= Release 2.0 =
== new data types ==
 * new core record type Publication allows to share publication metadata with link to full body text
 * new core record type Site allows to share hierarchical site definitions incl polygon based shapes