=Install Tomcat on Windows 7=
=Table of Contents=
<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

This tutorial explains how to install the Apache Tomcat Java Servlet 6 on Windows 7. This document is not tested to work with other versions of Tomcat or Java. For complete details, consult the specific documentation for those software installations.

==Prerequisites==
Please make sure the following conditions (software and version) are met before you continue.

1) The client version of Windows 7. This tutorial is written based on the 32-bit version of Windows 7.

2) The latest security upgrades.

3) JAVA 5 or JAVA 6 Framework installed. Please refer to http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html to install JRE. Assuming Java is installed in c:\\Program Files\Java\jre6.

4) Logged in as an administrator.

==Steps==
===1) Download Tomcat 6.x===
Download the latest stable Tomcat 6 Binary Distribution Core (32-bit/64-bit Windows Service Installer) release from http://tomcat.apache.org/download-60.cgi. This should put a file of the form apache-tomcat-6.x.x.exe(or apache-tomcat-6.x.x.tar if you download with Safari) into your Downloads folder.

===2) Install Tomcat 6.x===
Double click the executable to start installation wizard. Do fill information to specify the connector port, Tomcat administrator login credentials without changing the Roles.

===3) Run Tomcat===
Go to c:\\Program Files\Apache Software Foundation\Tomcat 6.0\bin
Double click the tomcat6 application.

You should see a terminal window showing logs about starting up Tomcat. When you see

{{{
INFO: Server startup in xxxx ms
}}}

That means the Tomcat is ready.

===4) Test Tomcat===
If Tomcat is running successfully following step 5, above, you should be able to see the Tomcat Welcome page at the following URL:

[http://localhost:8080/]

With the admin credentials you entered during the setup wizard, you can access:

[http://localhost:8080/manager/html]

Where you can upload the ipt.war file to install IPT.

===5) Shut down Tomcat===
Close the terminal windows will shut down Tomcat.

===6) References===
For more thorough descriptions of Tomcat configuration, also consult these sources:

   * Tomcat documentation: [http://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-6.0-doc/index.html]