#summary Getting started with IPT development
<font color=red>
_Warning: This page relates to the deprecated version 1 of the IPT_
</font>

= Getting Started =

== Introduction  ==

The GBIF IPT is an open source web application in Java that connects and serves biodiversity data that are registered in a GBIF IPT instance and connected to the GBIF distributed network for public consultation and use.

== Implementation ==

The IPT is a web application in Java that is managed by Maven. It uses a 2 tier architecture with DAO/Service layers. [http://geoserver.org Geoserver] provides spatial processing with a custom [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/source/browse/trunk/GT2-gbif-providertool/ datasource module] for WFS and mapping. Statistical charts are implemented with the [http://code.google.com/p/gchartjava Google Chart API]. Cache DB is embedded as a [http://www.h2database.com/ H2 database]. [http://lucene.apache.org/java/docs/ Lucene] provides full text searching. [http://jquery.com/ JQuery] provides JavaScript and AJAX support.
[http://appfuse.org/display/APF/AppFuse+QuickStart#AppFuseQuickStart-create Appfuse2] is used for the Struts 2 Basic archetype, although we may migrate away from AppFuse in favor of [http://struts.apache.org/2.x/index.html Struts2], [http://www.springsource.org/about Spring 2.5], [https://www.hibernate.org/5.html Hibernate], and [http://freemarker.sourceforge.net/docs/ FreeMarker].

== Working with the Code ==

Developers should start with the [EclipseEnvironmentAndCheckstyles Eclipse Setup] page that describe how to configure the Eclipse environment for IPT development and how to setup the IPT checkstyles that enforce good programming style.

Next, the  [EclipseSetupOSX Developing IPT on Mac OS X] page describes a typical Eclipse development setup for working with IPT source code, including checking out the source and setting up run configurations for deploying and debugging the IPT web application.

== Developer Community ==

The developer community exists primarily through the [http://groups.google.com/group/gbif-ipt-contributors GBIF IPT Contributors Group] and on this code site. 