{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}{\stylesheet {\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Isabel Calabuig}{\creationdate \yr2015\mo01\dy20\hr20\min48\sec40}{\title Amphibians and Reptiles collection at the Natural History Museum of Denmark (SNM)}{\keywords Specimen}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 Amphibians and Reptiles collection at the Natural History Museum of Denmark (SNM)\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Mogens \f3\fs24\cf0 Andersen\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 SNM, \f3\fs24\cf0 Universitetsparken 15, \f3\fs24\cf0 2100, \f3\fs24\cf0 Copenhagen OE\f3\fs24\cf0 , Denmark\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mogens \f3\fs24\cf0 Andersen\f3\fs24\cf0  (mandersen@snm.ku.dk)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 The Danish reptiles and amphibians are well represented in the collections, and not least thanks to a single collector (R. Skovgaard), the Museum has representative collections from the rest of Europe as well. The Museum possesses fine exotic collections from the earlier colonies of Denmark, e.g., from the earlier Danish West Indies. This material was treated by Reinhardt & L\u252?tken (1862). From the earlier settlements on the Coast of Guinea, the Museum possesses a small, but very fine collection of snakes, many of which formed the basis for the description of new species (Reinhardt, 1843), among others the spitting cobra, Naja nigricollis. Reinhardt\u180?s paper has been translated in English (Rasmussen & Hughes, 1997). Reinhardt increased the collections personally by undertaking three collecting trips to Brazil. The material was later treated by Reinhardt & L\u252?tken (1861). Most of the very-representative collections of reptiles and amphibians can be traced back to a single expedition or a single person. Thus, the Noona Dan Expedition (1961-1962) brought home a fine collection of terrestrial amphibians and reptiles from the Philippines and Melanesia and marine sea snakes from the Pacific. Since 1985, Arne Redsted Rasmussen has personally more than doubled the number of sea snakes in the collections. The Museum has fine collections of anuran amphibians, most of which have been collected by Arne Schi\u248?tz in connection with his studies on tree frogs from West Africa (1967). Later Arne Schi\u248?tz extended his studies (1985) to include the East African tree frogs as well. Since 1970, the Museum, including the staff at the herpetological section, has made extensive collection tours to East Africa. In consequence, the section has abundant collections (especially snakes) from this area. In May 2005 the then curator of herpetology, Jens B. Rasmussen passed away after a short period of illness. Jens Rasmussen was curator of herpetology at the museum since 1977. His research area focused on phylogeny and biogeography of African snakes and through his work Jens became one of the leading specialists in this field. During his last years Jens worked with a comprehensive revision of the material kept in major collections, with the aim of producing a speciation atlas for African snakes. The work will be published posthumously. For more information, please contact Professor, Dr. scient., Jon Fjeldsaa or assistant curator Mogens Andersen.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Specimen\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Data published through \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://www.gbif.org}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 GBIF\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 : \f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://danbif.au.dk/ipt/resource.do?r=amphibians}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://danbif.au.dk/ipt/resource.do?r=amphibians\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Datasets\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Dataset description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Object name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive Amphibians and Reptiles collection at the Natural History Museum of Denmark (SNM)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Character encoding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 UTF-8\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive format\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format version: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1.0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Distribution: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://danbif.au.dk/ipt/archive.do?r=amphibians}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://danbif.au.dk/ipt/archive.do?r=amphibians\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Publication date of data: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2015-01-20\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Licenses of use: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Zoological Museum - Natural History Museum of Denmark This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/).\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2012-02-06\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}